Project : Scalable Web App with ALB & Auto Scaling – Use EC2, ALB, and Auto Scaling for high availability. 
This project involves deploying a highly available web application using Amazon EC2, Application Load Balancer (ALB), and Auto Scaling. 
The goal is to ensure that the web app can scale automatically based on traffic demand while maintaining availability.
 Steps to Deploy a Scalable Web App

 Step 1: Create a Launch Template 
1. Go to AWS Console → EC2 → Launch Templates → Create Launch Template. 
2. Configure: ○ Name: WebAppTemplate ○ AMI: Amazon Linux 2 or Ubuntu ○ Instance Type: t2.micro (Free Tier) or t3.medium ○ Key Pair: Select an existing key pair or create a new one. User Data (Optional, for auto-installation of Apache/Nginx): 
#!/bin/ sudo yum update -y 
sudo yum install httpd -y 
sudo systemctl start httpd 
sudo systemctl enable httpd echo "Welcome to Scalable Web App" | sudo tee /var/www/html/index.html 
○ Security Group: Allow SSH (22), HTTP (80), and HTTPS (443).
 3. Click Create Launch Template. 

Step 2: Create an Auto Scaling Group
1. Go to EC2 → Auto Scaling Groups → Create Auto Scaling Group. 
2. Choose Launch Template: Select WebAppTemplate. 
3. Configure Group Size: ○ Desired Capacity: 2 ○ Minimum Instances:1 ○ Maximum Instances: 4 
4. Select Network: ○ Choose an existing VPC. ○ Select at least two subnets across different Availability Zones (AZs). 
5. Attach Load Balancer: ○ Choose Application Load Balancer (ALB). ○ Create Target Group: ■ Target Type: Instance ■ Protocol: HTTP ■ Health Check: / ○ Register instances later (Auto Scaling will handle this). 
6. Set Scaling Policies (Optional): 
○ Enable Auto Scaling based on CPU utilization. 
○ Example Policy: Scale out when CPU > 60%, Scale in when CPU < 40%. 
7. Click Create Auto Scaling Group. 

Step 3: Create an Application Load Balancer (ALB) 
1. Go to EC2 → Load Balancers → Create Load Balancer. 
2. Select Application Load Balancer. 
3. Configure Basic Settings: ○ Name: WebAppALB ○ Scheme: Internet-facing 
○ VPC: Select the same VPC as Auto Scaling.
 ○ Availability Zones: Choose at least 2. 
4. Configure Listeners: 
○ Protocol: HTTP ○ Port: 80 5. Target Group: ○ Select existing Target Group (from Auto Scaling Group). 6. Security Group: ○ Allow HTTP (80). 
7. Click Create Load Balancer.

 Step 4: Test the Setup 1. Get ALB DNS Name: ○ Go to EC2 → Load Balancers → Copy the ALB DNS Name. Open a browser and enter: http://your-alb-dns-name You should see: Welcome to Scalable Web App Step 5: Verify Auto Scaling 
1. Increase Load to Trigger Scaling: 
○ Use a tool like Apache Benchmark or manually increase traffic. Run: ab -n 1000 -c 50 http://your-alb-dns-name/ 
○ Check EC2 → Auto Scaling Group to see if new instances launch. 2. Stop an Instance: 
○ Manually stop an instance to verify if Auto Scaling replaces it. Conclusion This setup ensures: 
✅ High Availability using ALB 
✅ Scalability using Auto Scaling
✅ Redundancy across multiple AZs 
This architecture is commonly used for production applications that need reliability and cost optimization. 
